Politics interfere with scientific reasoning FACT: Clean air and clean water are crucial. In 1980, the so-called experts were saying the world would freeze over because of pollution. TIME magazine and National Geographic and others reported this. Then, a few years later in 2000, the S-CEs were clamoring that the world would be covered with water in 12 years because of global warming. Apparently, the S-CEs were going the wrong way on the thermometer. 
The facts weren't adding up. What happened then? Let's call it "Climate Change," which is reported in the news media as Fact now. Not so fast. I'm a big believer in common sense. How could scientists conclude there is global cooling? Then, in a blink of an eye 20 years later, the earth is on a trajectory of global warming. That doesn't make sense, does it? Keep in mind, the earth went through a global warming period. Illinois was covered with glaciers up to 10,000 years ago. The melting of glaciers in Illinois wasn't caused by humans, was it? Several publications disagree about global warming. The NIPCC report on scientific consensus titled, "Why Scientists Disagree About Global Warming" is a good source to read. It argues that there is no consensus among scientists, there are flawed projections and postulates, unreliable circumstantial evidence, etc. In conclusion, to be fair, scientists always should be in the business of disproving hypotheses. The political climate is getting in the way of scientific reasoning. Let's allow the debate to flourish and allow scientists to debate global cooling, global warming, or the temperature is within historical norms. In the meantime, for those who know the world will end in I guess 10 years, please send me your money. You won't be needing it. I'll be happy to use it for good purposes. Michael Fuechtmann Roselle Celebrities and secular science I recently read about Greta Thunberg being named Time's Person of the Year. Greta Thunberg and celebrity actor Leonardo DiCaprio, who is publicly supporting Ms. Thunberg, are two people without a background in science. And yet their opinions on climate change are apparently highly respected by many. When a once-Christian nation becomes secular, that nation rejects the ultimate authority of God's word and replaces such with the science and opinions of men. As we now know, science, like man's opinions, is ever changing. The corrupt science and emotionally fueled opinions of celebrities are poor substitutes for the wisdom of God. When I was a boy, quite a few years ago, there was an actor that they called the King of Hollywood. His name was Clark Gable. Clark Gable described himself as, "A lucky slob from Ohio." Unlike today's celebrities Mr. Gable never saw his fame as something that gave him wisdom greater than the average American. There was another man of humility that I remember from childhood. Broadcast and print journalist Edward R. Murrow. Mr. Murrow commented on self-important celebrities this way: "Just because your voice reaches halfway around the world doesn't mean you are wiser than when it reached only to the end of the bar." Currently America is at great risk. We steer our ship by the capricious opinions of celebrities and by the deceitful conclusions of scientific experts. Many years ago sailors would guide their ships to safe harbor at night by focusing on the lighthouse. That lighthouse was a constant. It never moved, and so it was a faithful guide. My prayer is that in these dark secular days, America will decide to guide our nation to safe harbor by focusing on God's word, which is a constant. It never changes Charles Danyus Round Lake Beach, Even naughty kids don't deserve lumps of coal Santa might want to rethink his strategy these days. No matter how poorly kids behave, they don't deserve to wake up on Christmas morning to coal in their stockings. When the burning of coal and other fossil fuels is destroying the future of all kids, this is just too cruel. Whether naughty or nice, our kids deserve a clean world in which to live. It's not too late to turn things around. There is a bill in Congress that has the support of conservative, liberal and moderate citizens that would be a great start on giving our kids that clean world. The Energy Innovation and Carbon Dividend Act (HR 763) would put a steadily rising price on carbon and give the net revenue to U.S. citizens in equal shares. The free market takes care of the rest as people and industry choose cheaper clean energy over dirty and increasingly expensive fossil fuels. As long as Santa leaves the coal in the ground, his visit will make even our naughty kids smile. And if we do our jobs as citizens and call our legislators about HR763, we can give that smile a chance to last a life time. Mark Ailes Lombard Support candidates whose eyes are open Scientific study after study has reported that human-caused global warming is the greatest threat of our time. However, Trump and most Republicans pretend that human-caused climate change doesn't exist, use fake or irrelevant facts or claim it's a negligible issue. Their responses remind me of the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast from the planet Traal, described in Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. The Beast assumes that "if you can't see it, it can't see you." So you can avoid disaster by shutting your eyes. Unlike avoiding the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast, shutting your eyes won't stop climate heating. It still would cause increasing crises in the next decade and will make life unbearable for your children and grandchildren. This is why Marie Wilson's Dec. 2 article on 6th District congressional candidates should be required reading. She reports that Republican candidates Ives and Kinzler say climate warming isn't important to them or district residents. In contrast, Congressman Sean Casten agrees with all reputable scientific studies that climate warming is the single biggest existential threat we face. While Ives and Kinzler are keeping their eyes tightly shut, Rep. Casten is working on bills that would increase the nation's green energy storage capacity, would help develop ways to produce materials without emitting carbon, supports other efforts to mitigate climate changes and, along with the U.S. military, seeks ways to protect our nation against the climate-caused catastrophes that already have begun occurring. This month, he is participating with other Democrats in the annual United Nations Climate Change discussions (COP25). Those who shut their eyes to climate warming along with Ives and Kinzler and other Republican candidates are stealing their children's and grandchildren's future. Please vote to re-elect Sean Casten. Darold Barnum Oak Park It's incomprehensible to deny climate change. The oddest thing about climate change is not the fact of it, but the dialogue about it. Look, the climate is changing, the data is clear. The world is warming. Why is this a political discussion? Why does one party line up to deny man-made climate change? Good news: At least Florida's politicians are finally getting it. Maybe because it affects that state directly. A scientist can point to charts and tables, but that's when the deniers' eyes glaze over. Let me just add one recent datum: Greenland's ice is melting faster than expected and could add 26 inches to sea level by 2100. Source: ScienceFocus.com, BBC and others. Climate change is not a hoax, as some who are politically motivated maintain. Did you ever see a greenhouse on a cold snowy day? The green plants inside are doing just fine. Greenhouse gases work the same way that greenhouse glass works. It's not a political question. You can't lobby Mother Nature. Here are the arguments: "The climate is always changing." Well, yes. Just like there have always been car accidents and for lots of different reasons; does that mean we should barrel through red lights? "The predictions are wrong." Yes, many have been off somewhat. But, so have many of Newton's (you know, the apple and the tree guy) gravity predictions until modified slightly by Einstein. An apple will still fall from a tree despite errors in Newton's law. Even though Newton was wrong, no one is encouraged to walk off a roof. Let's say nine of out 10 doctors tell you that a life threatening tumor you have must be removed as soon as possible. Let's say one out of 10 says, "Nah ... let's wait to see what happens." Which doc's advice would you follow? Sanford Morganstein West Dundee